# Data Types
JavaScript is a dynamically typed language, which means variables can hold different types of data throughout the program's execution. Understanding data types in JavaScript is crucial for effective programming.

> **Note:** Literals are fixed values that are directly written into the code
> 
<br>

## 1. Primitive Data Types

### 1.1. String Literals
Refers to a series of characters enclosed in single quotes (`''`), double quotes (`""`) or double backticks (`` ` ``).
```
const greeting = "Hello, John!";

// String interpolation with template literals
const name = "John";
const greeting = "Hello, ${name}!`;
```
Using double backticks to enclose strings <mark>(Template Literals)</mark> allows variables to be embedded into strings with `${}`.
<br>
<br>  
### 1.2. Number Literals
Represents both integer (`20`, `-1`) and floating-point numbers (`-5.2`, `2.6784`).
<br>
<br>
### 1.3. BigInt Literals
Represents integer of arbitary precision, big integer is useful for applications that require precise calculations with very large numbers. To initialize a big integer, place character `n` at the end of a large number.
```
const bigIntPlaceholder = 1234567890123456789012345678901234567890n;
```
<br>

### 1.4. Boolean Literals
Represent a `true` or `false` values.
<br>
<br>
  
### 1.5. Undefined
Represents a variable that has been declared but have not been initialized.
<br>
<br>

### 1.6. Null
Represents an explicitly defined absence of value.
```
const nullPlaceholder = null;
```
<br>
 
### 1.7. Symbol
Symbol in JavaScript is a primitive data type introduced in ECMAScript 2015 (ES6). It represents a <mark>unique identifier</mark> that is guaranteed to be unique across the entire program. For example, it is used to create unique object keys because each symbol is unique even with the same value.
```
const symbol = new Symbol("uniqueIdentifier");
```
<br>


## 2. Type Casting
In JavaScript, you often need to convert data from one type to another. This process is known as type conversion or type casting. There are two types of type conversion: implicit (automatic) and explicit (manual)

### 2.1. Converting to String
#### `String()`
```
const num = 123;
const str = String(num); // "123"
```

#### `toString()`
```
const num = 123;
const str = num.toString(); // "123"
```

#### Template Literals
```
const num = 123;
const str = `${num}`; // "123"
```
<br>

### 2.2. Converting to Number
#### `Number()`
```
const str = "123";
const num = Number(str); // 123
```

#### `+` Unary Plus Operator
```
const str = "123";
const num = +str; // 123
```

#### `parseInt()` and `parseFloat()`
```
const strInt = "123";
const numInt = parseInt(strInt); // 123

const strFloat = "123.45";
const numFloat = parseFloat(strFloat); // 123.45
```
<br>

### 2.3. Converting to Boolean
Javascript has a concept of "truthy" and "falsy" values. When a value is converted to a boolean, it will either be `true` (truthy) or `false` (falsy). Values like `0`, `null`, `undefined` or `empty string` are considered falsy.
#### `Boolean()`
```
const str = "hello";
const bool = Boolean(str); // true
```

#### Double NOT (`!!`) Operator
```
const str = "hello"
const bool = !!str; // true
```
<br>

### 2.4. Converting to BigInt
```
const num = 123;
const bigInt = BigInt(num); // 123n
```
<br>

### 2.5. Converting to Symbol
#### `Symbol()`
```
const str = "hello";
const symbol = Symbol(str);
```
<br>

## 3. Checking Data Type
Use `typeof` keyword to check data types to ensure correct type handling.

```
if (typeof age === "number") {
    console.log(`${age} is a number`);
}

if (typeof name == "string) {
    console.log (`${name} is a string`);
}
```
